# Annotations and annotation processing

## Annotations

Room uses annotations to decide which code to generate for the database interaction. So first a short introduction about what annotations are.

Annotations are a form of metadata that can be used in Java and Kotlin. These annotations do not influence the workings of the program directly but can be used to provide information to the compiler or even be read at runtime.

### Use cases

#### __Extra information for the compiler__

Some annotations are read out at compile time. They can be used for the detection of errors in code that would otherwise be invisible. They are used for the suppression of warnings over which the compiler would stumble otherwise.

A good example of an annotation used for the compiler is the `@Override` annotation which indicates that this method overrides a method of a parent. Now the compiler can check that this method indeed overrides a method of a parent class, and warn otherwise. This warning is then shown in the IDEA to notify the developer of his/her mistake.

#### __Compile time annotation processing by external programs__

This is what Room uses to simplify the SQLite usage in Android Development. Annotation processors are external programs that can be hooked in the compiler. These will then read their targeting annotations and then operate upon this collected data. The broadest application of annotation processing is code generation to simplify tedious tasks and generate boilerplate code.

#### __Runtime processing__

Java and Kotlin provide libraries to read out annotations at runtime using reflection. Reflection is a tool to operate upon the executing code (introspect), and even manipulate properties and instantiate new objects. Reflection can also be used to read the metadata provided by annotations during runtime. There is one downside of runtime annotation processing: reflection slows down your program significantly. Reflection is slow because it needs to do a lot of validation before it can effectively read the value of an annotation. It needs to check if the current method to read the annotation from exists and also if it is annotated or not.

### Retention policies

The retention policy of an annotation indicates for how long the annotations should be able to be retained. Or in other words, until when the annotations should be accessible in the code.

#### __Source__

The annotations are only retained during compilation, so are only accessible by the compiler itself, or programs plugged into the compiler like annotation processors. After the compilation is done, these annotations will be discarded and thus are not found in the compiled bytecode.

#### __Class__

The annotations are included in the class files (bytecode) after the compilation, but indicating your annotation with the class retention policy, the JVM (Java Virtual Machine) will not be able to read the annotations.

#### __Runtime__

Annotations are included in the class files, just like the class retention policy. The difference here is that the class files can be read by the JVM. This is what enables reflection and runtime processing.

### Example

```java
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.SOURCE)
@Target(ElementType.TYPE)
public @interface Entity {
    String tableName() default "";
}
```

This is an example of an custom defined annotation. You can see that we defined its retention policy in another annotation. We also set its target to `ElementType.TYPE`. This means that this annotation will only be valid to use at class level. Another possibility is using `ElementType.FIELD`, which enables you to annotate fields with it. You can also combine multiple elementTypes.

## Annotation processing

Annotation processors are programs that are hooked into the Javac compiler. They can analyse the source code for certain annotations and handle them in a specified manner. They can produce errors and warnings to provide extra validation of the source code, but can also generate new source files.

The latter one here is what the Room library uses. Let's take a deeper look into the workings of Room.


[< BACK](./The%20magic%20of%20Room's%20annotation%20processor.md)