# Setting up a database with Room

Now we understand what annotations are and how SQLite works in Android, we will take a look at Room.

Room has a broad set of annotations in its library, but we will only take a look at the following:

* `@Entity`
* `@PrimaryKey`
* `@Ignore`
* `@Dao`
* `@Query`
* `@Insert`
* `@Database`

## Defining an entity with Room

To notify Room that a certain class has to be persisted in the database, we annotate the class with the `@Entity` annotation. Furthermore we annotate the field we want as the primary key with `@PrimaryKey`. Now, Room will generate a bunch of code that will create a table in the database for this entity. By default, all the defined fields of the class will be converted to a column. We can specify fields that should not be persisted with the `@Ignore` annotation.

```java
@Entity(tableName = "car")
public class Car {
   @PrimaryKey(autoGenerate = true)
   private int id;
   private String make;
   private String model;
   private double price;
}
```

Note that the `@Entity` annotation takes a parameter `tableName` which will set the name of the database table to this string. If we don’t specify this name, Room just takes the name of the class.

Furthermore, we can specify if the primary key should be automatically generated or not in the `@PrimaryKey` annotation.

## Defining a Data Access Object with Room

Data Access Objects are the main classes in which you define the interactions with the database for a specific entity. We use the `@Dao` annotation on an interface to let Room know an interface should be seen as a dao. In this dao interface, we can now specify abstract methods and annotate them. These annotations will give Room the necessary information on how to generate the implementation of these methods.

To create the insert database interaction, you use the `@Insert`  annotation. The method that gets this annotation should take an instance of the entity class as a parameter.

To create other queries like a find all or a delete, you use the `@Query` annotation. In this annotation, you specify the query that should be run when executing this method. It is also possible to bind arguments from the method to the query. This can be done by prefixing the name of the instance with ‘:’ and giving a parameter with the same name to the abstract method.

```java
@Dao
interface CarDao {
   @Insert
   fun insert(item: Car) : Long

   @Query("SELECT * from car")
   fun findAll(): List<Car>

   @Query("DELETE FROM car WHERE id = :itemId")
   fun delete(itemId: Int)
}
```

## Defining a database class with Room

Database classes are the access point for the database interaction when working with Room. It contains methods to get the reference to the Dao’s to execute queries.

To define a database class, you create an abstract class and annotate it with the `@Database` annotation. This annotation takes a list of classes to inform Room on which classes should be treated as entities. You also specify the version of the database.

```java
@Database(entities = [Car::class], version = 1)
abstract class DemoRoomDatabase : RoomDatabase() {
   abstract fun carDao(): CarDao
}
```


[< BACK](./The%20magic%20of%20Room's%20annotation%20processor.md)